PEP 770: Add sections for Users, Projects, and SCA tools in 'How to Teach' (#4222)
python/peps: peps/pep-0770.rst

consuming included SBOM documents and other Python package metadata to
generate complete SBOM documents for Python packages.

Terminology
-----------

This section describes terminology used later in the document:

> * **Root SBOM directory**: This is the directory within a Python project source

Reviewer: ah, this is similar to how PEP-639 does it with `root license directory`
https://github.com/python/peps/blob/9b8e3f9be205b1ea9bb787145c61b5791091f97c/peps/pep-0639.rst?plain=1#L236-L251

maybe you could copy/adapt their style. several years of grind, and multiple readings made this PEP-639 my personal favorite regarding understandability/readability.

Author: Ah great idea, I'll do that.

Author: Done in https://github.com/python/peps/pull/4222/commits/5a2bea568148a6d4bc8d8821024b6f0ad1400c00

added to the Python Packaging User Guide for how to specify and maintain
SBOM documents for Python packages in source code.

> There are two "camps" of projects that contain other software, those from

Reviewer 2: Of course, a project can be both (I think NumPy might vendor some BLAS Fortran?)
```suggestion
There are two groups of projects that contain other software, those from
```

> a "packaging ecosystem" (PyPI, Linux distros, Rust, NPM, etc) and those from

Reviewer 2: Seems odd that we say NPM/PyPI for JS and Python, but Rust instead of https://crates.io
```suggestion
a "packaging ecosystem" (PyPI, Linux distros, Crates.io, NPM, etc) and those from
```

outside a packaging ecosystem (vendored C, C++, Fortran). Software that is
a part of a packaging ecosystem is much easier to identify meaning
that package maintainers may have their package SBOM data annotated

> automatically by common build tools (auditwheel, cibuildwheel, multibuild, etc).

Reviewer 2: Perhaps link to these tools?

maintainers of Python packages and developers of SCA tools such as
SBOM generation tools and vulnerability scanners.

What do Python package maintainers need to know?

> ------------------------------------------------

Author: @pfmoore Since you requested this section to be updated, could you give this a quick peep to see if it feels comprehensive enough for the standard itself? Happy to expand on any section, but I think this is the only outstanding point on this PR?

Reviewer 3: It looks OK to me, but mainly in that it suggests that pure-python projects don't need to do anything. It's not as definite as I'd like, but I understand that there's always exceptions, and being *too* definite can be misleading.

For projects that do need SBOMs, I can't really comment much (beyond that it gives a good idea of when you'd need to consider this). Personally, the text here leaves me baffled as to what I'd do next, but that's not surprising as I don't know anything about SBOMs. I don't think I'm the audience for this, though, so that's not really a problem...

Reviewer: > Personally, the text here leaves me baffled as to what I'd do next, but that's not surprising as I don't know anything about SBOMs

That puts you in the same situation most python maintainers are, I suppose.
Would you say, that after reading that paragraph, you can clearly say in which situations a py-package should contain an SBOM?

Reviewer 3: Not even remotely. But personally, I have no interest in SBOMs, so my approach would be to not provide a SBOM until someone raised an issue asking for one, and then I’d ask for a PR. Furthermore, I would not maintain the SBOM myself, but would expect users who need the SBOM to contribute maintenance patches as needed.

That may not be “sufficient”, but IMO it’s what you get if you expect volunteers to provide your commercial governance data…

Author: @pfmoore Agreed on being too definite referencing pure-Python packages. How about this way of framing?

> Python package metadata can already describe the top-level software included in
a package archive, but what if a package archive contains other software
components beyond the top-level software? For example, the Python wheel for
"Pillow" contains a handful of other software libraries bundled inside, like
``libjpeg``, ``libpng``, ``libwebp``, and so on. This scenario is where this PEP
is most useful: for adding metadata about bundled software to a Python package.
>
> Depending on which tools are used to build a Python package archive a Python
package may need to create their own SBOM document or a Python packages'
build tools may automatically annotate dependencies. Typically tools can
automatically annotate dependencies when those dependencies come from a
"packaging ecosystem" (such as PyPI, Linux distros, Crates.io, NPM, etc).

Reviewer: > Depending on which tools are used to build a Python package archive a Python
package may need to create their own SBOM document or a Python packages'
build tools may automatically annotate **_bundled_** dependencies.

Reviewer 3: > **_If the package author wishes to provide a SBOM, then_** depending on which tools are used to build a Python package archive a Python package may need to create their own SBOM document

The point I'm trying to make is that it's important to point out that the whole idea of providing SBOM data is optional in the first place. It's not needed for a functioning package, nor is it needed as metadata unless you're subject to regulations that require it of you (which most open source maintainers aren't).

Author: @pfmoore Yeah that optionality for the manual SBOM creation isn't specified enough. I split out the automated and manual annotation sections, because I think for most projects that do end up providing SBOM data it'll be done automatically for them. I expect the manual case to be fairly rare (especially for maintainers of open source projects like you mention). How's this?

> Some build tools may be able to automatically annotate bundled dependencies.
Typically tools can automatically annotate bundled dependencies when those
dependencies come from a "packaging ecosystem" (such as PyPI, Linux distros,
Crates.io, NPM, etc).
>
> For packages which cannot be automatically annotated and if the package author
wishes to provide an SBOM the approach will be to generate or author SBOM files
and then include those files using ``pyproject.toml``: ...

Author: Thanks for the review! I've made the changes in https://github.com/python/peps/pull/4222/commits/33d8bec9a188812010fbad7053d966222163bd55
